---
title: A Case of Identity
date: 1891-09-01T12:00:00Z
layout: post
tags:
- holmes
- watson
- inheritance
---
“My dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side of the fire in
his lodgings at Baker Street, “life is infinitely stranger than anything which
the mind of man could invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which
are really mere commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window
hand in hand, hover over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in
at the queer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, the
plannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working through
generations, and leading to the most outré results, it would make all fiction
with its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and
unprofitable.”

“And yet I am not convinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which come to light
in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our
police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it
must be confessed, neither fascinating nor artistic.”

“A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic
effect,” remarked Holmes. “This is wanting in the police report, where more
stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the
details, which to an observer contain the vital essence of the whole matter.
Depend upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace.”

I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite understand your thinking so,” I said.
“Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who
is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents, you are brought in contact
with all that is strange and bizarre. But here”—I picked up the morning paper
from the ground—“let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading
upon which I come. ‘A husband’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half a column of
print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me.
There is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the
bruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent
nothing more crude.”

“Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,” said Holmes,
taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. “This is the Dundas separation
case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearing up some small points in
connection with it. The husband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and
the conduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up
every meal by taking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which,
you will allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of the
average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I
have scored over you in your example.”

He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of
the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life
that I could not help commenting upon it.

“Ah,” said he, “I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little
souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of
the Irene Adler papers.”

“And the ring?” I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which sparkled upon
his finger.

“It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in which I
served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have
been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little problems.”

“And have you any on hand just now?” I asked with interest.

“Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest. They are
important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed, I have found that
it is usually in unimportant matters that there is a field for the observation,
and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the charm to an
investigation. The larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the
crime the more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one
rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is
nothing which presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, that
I may have something better before very many minutes are over, for this is one
of my clients, or I am much mistaken.”

He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing
down into the dull neutral-tinted London street. Looking over his shoulder, I
saw that on the pavement opposite there stood a large woman with a heavy fur
boa round her neck, and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat
which was tilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear.
From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at
our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers
fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who
leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of
the bell.

“I have seen those symptoms before,” said Holmes, throwing his cigarette into
the fire. “Oscillation upon the pavement always means an affaire de cœur. She
would like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too delicate for
communication. And yet even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been
seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a
broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the
maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in
person to resolve our doubts.”

As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons entered to
announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behind his small
black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock
Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and,
having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in
the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.

“Do you not find,” he said, “that with your short sight it is a little trying
to do so much typewriting?”

“I did at first,” she answered, “but now I know where the letters are without
looking.” Then, suddenly realising the full purport of his words, she gave a
violent start and looked up, with fear and astonishment upon her broad,
good-humoured face. “You’ve heard about me, Mr. Holmes,” she cried, “else how
could you know all that?”

“Never mind,” said Holmes, laughing; “it is my business to know things. Perhaps
I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If not, why should you come
to consult me?”

“I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose husband
you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him up for dead. Oh,
Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I’m not rich, but still I have
a hundred a year in my own right, besides the little that I make by the
machine, and I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.”

“Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?” asked Sherlock Holmes,
with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.

Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss Mary
Sutherland. “Yes, I did bang out of the house,” she said, “for it made me angry
to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank—that is, my father—took it all. He
would not go to the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he
would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done, it made me
mad, and I just on with my things and came right away to you.”

“Your father,” said Holmes, “your stepfather, surely, since the name is
different.”

“Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too, for he is
only five years and two months older than myself.”

“And your mother is alive?”

“Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes, when she
married again so soon after father’s death, and a man who was nearly fifteen
years younger than herself. Father was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road,
and he left a tidy business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy,
the foreman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the business, for he
was very superior, being a traveller in wines. They got £ 4700 for the goodwill
and interest, which wasn’t near as much as father could have got if he had been
alive.”
