---
title: The Five Orange Pips
date: 1891-11-01T12:00:00Z
layout: post
tags:
- holmes
- watson
- murder
---
When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes cases between
the years ’82 and ’90, I am faced by so many which present strange and
interesting features that it is no easy matter to know which to choose and
which to leave. Some, however, have already gained publicity through the
papers, and others have not offered a field for those peculiar qualities which
my friend possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of these
papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his analytical skill, and would
be, as narratives, beginnings without an ending, while others have been but
partially cleared up, and have their explanations founded rather upon
conjecture and surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to
him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable in its
details and so startling in its results that I am tempted to give some account
of it in spite of the fact that there are points in connection with it which
never have been, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.

The year ’87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or less
interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headings under this one
twelve months I find an account of the adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the
Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of a
furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the British barque
Sophy Anderson, of the singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island
of Uffa, and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be
remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man’s watch, to
prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that therefore the
deceased had gone to bed within that time—a deduction which was of the greatest
importance in clearing up the case. All these I may sketch out at some future
date, but none of them present such singular features as the strange train of
circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to
describe.

It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales had set in
with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed and the rain had
beaten against the windows, so that even here in the heart of great, hand-made
London we were forced to raise our minds for the instant from the routine of
life and to recognise the presence of those great elemental forces which shriek
at mankind through the bars of his civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage.
As evening drew in, the storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and
sobbed like a child in the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of
the fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the other was
deep in one of Clark Russell’s fine sea-stories until the howl of the gale from
without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of the rain to lengthen
out into the long swash of the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her
mother’s, and for a few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at
Baker Street.

“Why,” said I, glancing up at my companion, “that was surely the bell. Who
could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?”

“Except yourself I have none,” he answered. “I do not encourage visitors.”

“A client, then?”

“If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on such a day
and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely to be some crony of
the landlady’s.”

Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came a step in
the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out his long arm to turn
the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer
must sit.

“Come in!” said he.

The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside, well-groomed
and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacy in his bearing. The
streaming umbrella which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof
told of the fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about him
anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and
his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great
anxiety.

“I owe you an apology,” he said, raising his golden pince-nez to his eyes. “I
trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought some traces of the
storm and rain into your snug chamber.”

“Give me your coat and umbrella,” said Holmes. “They may rest here on the hook
and will be dry presently. You have come up from the south-west, I see.”

“Yes, from Horsham.”

“That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quite
distinctive.”

“I have come for advice.”

“That is easily got.”

“And help.”

“That is not always so easy.”

“I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast how you saved
him in the Tankerville Club scandal.”

“Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.”

“He said that you could solve anything.”

“He said too much.”

“That you are never beaten.”

“I have been beaten four times—three times by men, and once by a woman.”

“But what is that compared with the number of your successes?”

“It is true that I have been generally successful.”

“Then you may be so with me.”

“I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me with some
details as to your case.”

“It is no ordinary one.”

“None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal.”

“And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have ever
listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of events than those which
have happened in my own family.”

“You fill me with interest,” said Holmes. “Pray give us the essential facts
from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to those details
which seem to me to be most important.”

The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towards the
blaze.

“My name,” said he, “is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as far as I can
understand, little to do with this awful business. It is a hereditary matter;
so in order to give you an idea of the facts, I must go back to the
commencement of the affair.

“You must know that my grandfather had two sons—my uncle Elias and my father
Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry, which he enlarged at the
time of the invention of bicycling. He was a patentee of the Openshaw
unbreakable tire, and his business met with such success that he was able to
sell it and to retire upon a handsome competence.
